all political theorists are intentionists.
science is the formalization of intentionism. it speak of causation as if there is nothing in the world which something 'does not cause'.

intentionism is where individuals and groups believe that nothing worthwhile is going to happen unless it is made to happen. thus life becomes the job of making things happen the way the individual or group wants them to happen.

situationism acknowledges the natural primacy of the 'fielding' aspect of the hitting-fielding combination.

situational opportunity is the mother of intention. empty space does not orchestrate and shape assertive action, but opportunity-rich situations do. science and scientific thinkers look at dynamics framed by empty space, thus the only sourcing influence they can see is 'intention'.

"“That which gives the extraordinary firmness to our belief in causality is not the great habit of seeing one occurrence following another but our inability to interpret events otherwise than as events caused by intentions. It is belief in the living and thinking as the only effective force–in will, in intention–it is belief that every event is a deed, that every deed presupposes a doer, it is belief in the “subject.” Is this belief in the concept of subject and attribute not a great stupidity?” – Nietzsche, ‘Will to Power’ 484

nietzsche is pointing to this fundamental 'difference' that characterizes European civilization; i.e. it has put 'intentionism' into an unnatural primacy over 'situationism'.

western man believes that everything he does jumpstarts from out of his own creative genius, and denies that the first order of credit has to go to the amazing diversity he is included in that inductively orchestrates and shapes what he does. this amazing 'socket' of nature is what he is plugging into. only if he conceives of himself as an independent reason-driven machine residing and operating in a passive operating theatre, can he claim that his achievements are driven by HIS INTENTION.

nietzsche mocked darwinism's 'great stupidity' for trying to explain evolution in the one-sided terms of organismic intention [survival]. lamarck's theory had credited the excitation of the situational socket (field) for inductively evolving the assertive behaviour in the organism so that 'intention' was nothing more than 'appearances'. emerson also saw the inductive genius of nature as not only inhabiting the organism but creating it.

situationism is thus in an innate primacy over intentionism, ... IN NATURE.

Western civilized man's hubris inverts this, in his head, and proclaims that intentionism precedes situationism. in other words, he sees 'man's actions' and 'man's judgements (scientific and moral) as 'primary' [in science, this is achieved by imputing absolute space and absolute time reference framing]. since man sees his behaviour in the one-sided terms of 'intention-driven' and since intention needs direction, moral codes to guide intention arise to make a complete package out of this one-sided way of intellectually idealizing dynamics which extracts, notionally, human social dynamics from out of the full package of natures relational activity continuum.

Western civilized man believes that there is such a thing as a 'human social dynamic' that can be separated out from the overall transforming relational activity continuum, and thus he puts himself into an intellectually idealized 'operative reality' which is all about 'humans' [as if they were independent beings with internal process driven and directed behaviours] and 'what humans do' as if humans interact with one another out of the context of the relational activity continuum.

this is what comes of putting 'intentionism' into an unnatural primacy over 'situationism'; i.e. it puts humans (civilizeds) into an intellectually idealized 'operative reality', ... a fairyland inhabited by independent humans with internal process driven and directed behaviours that reside, operate and interact in a habitat that is independent of the inhabitants that reside, operate and interact within it.

Western civilization forms from humans teaching their children that the intentionist [scientific] fairyland where intellectual idealization is put into an unnatural primacy over the physical reality of our natural experience, is the 'primary reality'.

the cargo cult tribal members, who may have a fine life experience, who knows, since we cannot share another person's experience, look amusing to us because of their 'build it and they shall come' situationist approach to enticing the big metal birds to alight and disgorge wonderful presents from their shiny bellies, ... but if we suspend our mirth for a moment, we might see in this a people that acknowledges situationism. should the man go out with his club and his shopping list, beat up a woman and drag her home by her hair? or should man build a shelter and hang some fresh meat from the hunt therein, so that when he returns in the evening, he may find a lone female who, after sating her hunger and basking in the shelter's comfort, asleep in his bed.

the inverting of the natural order of 'situationism over intentionism' into a dysfunctional 'intentionism over situationism' is the characteristic feature of Western civilization which underlies the very different social dynamics of European civilizeds vis a vis the social dynamics of the world's indigenous 'sauvages'.

one does not have to be 'anti-civilization' and seek to 'destroy 'IT'. the hierarchical control structures are the artefacts of putting 'intentionism into an unnatural primacy over situationism' [i.e. putting intellectual idealizations into an unnatural primacy over our experience-based intuition].

the 'civilizeds' are people whose sociolinguistic mojo has bewitched their understanding. breaking out of the trance is the necessary and impending re-evolution.

and what can we say about all of the amazing 'scientific advances' that European civilization has architected and operationalized? much of their value is assigned on the basis of their contribution to the turbo-charging of human intentionism within the 'fairyland' 'operative reality' of a humanity separate from 'the rest of nature'. how would wolf and turtle speak for them in the talking circle. if the world is only given once, as a transforming relational activity continuum, then we would have to refer our evaluation to ongoing balance and harmonies in the relational activity continuum, rather than to 'human progress' in terms of man enhancing his [fairyland operative-reality-based] powers of intentionism.
as sir einzige suggests, the issue of separating sources and symptoms is problematic in these discussions.

all one needs to make up a bullshit predicative scenario is some noun-subjects and verbs and the attention of other noun-and-verb Indo-European language-and-grammar aficionados.

everyone comes forth with their 'who is doing what to whom' causal constructions, as if the world dynamic can be meaningfully RE-presented by causal agents and the noun-verb-predicate 'results' of 'their actions'.

science set the pattern here by deciding that inquiry into the origin and nature of physical phenomena could be meaningfully approached by considering the phenomena to be the result of the action of 'causal agents' or 'forces' or 'properties' of local systems.

modern physics came along later and claimed that 'relations are all there are' so that these 'causal agents' are exposed as 'schaumkommen', relational features in a transforming relational activity continuum.

it is only the God-like power of grammar that imputes 'reality' to the noun-subjects we invent so that we can tack on a verb and give them the power to cause the 'results' we are addressing. if one throws enough 'noun-subjects' into the mill, one can construct whatever sort of scenario one wants. noun-and-verb language is that kind of tool, and it is used by the left and the right, and the question is not 'who is using it correctly', but to look beneath the synthetic subject-verb-predicate machinery to the relational origins of the social dynamic.

if you want to stick with the 'causal agent' model of newtonian thinking, all you need to do is put together sufficient number of notional noun-subjects (doesn't matter if they are ambiguous or over-lapping in their definitions, it will all come out in the wash because the inference will be that 'they are the cause of what is currently unfolding', and so noun-and-verb language allows us to build giant tautologies wherein the internal components of a 'system' (some manifest behaviour that is commonly spoken about) explain the behaviour of the system. of course the concept of a local system is pure intellectual idealization, and explanation in terms of its 'internal components' is based on tautological propositions. within the transforming relational social dynamic, a relational activity we call a 'university' gathers, and we call it 'a university' and then we explain it 'analytically' as if it's development and behaviour was powered by subject-verb-predicate cause-effect results of its internal components and processes. thanks to this tautology, we are able to BELIEVE IN THE EXISTENCE OF THE UNIVERSITY as a local system with internal process driven and directed behaviour, ... and we can forget about the physical reality of the relational social dynamic, sometimes called the 'relational suprasystem' within which the university is a relational activity. by endowing an activity with noun-subject-status, we can make it APPEAR TO BE the jumpstart causal agent of its own self-authored results. the symptom becomes the source.

if you don't understand what is going on, you can manage on the basis of the physical reality of natural experience (as in the circle process of indigenous anarchism)

if you prefer to believe in causal explanations of relational phenomena, then you have to invent sufficient noun-subjects to throw up a smokescreen between commonly observed physically manifest unfoldings, and the mess of alleged causal agents that one can populate the pseudo reality of a causal explanation.

here's what the author of the article has used. note that the 'royal we' is important, .. it invites the reader to join the author inside of his perspective, .. but has no real meaning since the author has presented so many different perspectives within his commentary. here's his list of causal agencies (most of which are undefined and overlapping one another ruling out the applicability of logical propositions based on them) 
Western justice is based on the scientific-mechanical view of humans as 'independent beings' who are fully and solely responsible for the results of their actions.

this is foundational to moral judgement of individuals as in Western retributive justice.

there is also the justice of indigenous anarchism; i.e. 'restorative justice' which stems from a different view of the 'self' as a channeler of the relational dynamics of community. in this view, nasty behaviours are seen as coming FIRSTLY from the community and only secondly from the individual 'channeler' of relational social tensions.

while the child soldier is dangerous and has to be dealt with, there is no sense that justice is done by punishing the child since the sourcing of the violence tracks back to the community (relational social dynamics) the child is situationally included in, ... which includes enforcers and judges.

even in Western slave-owning community, moral judgement based retributive justice had no problem applying moral judgement to a slave breaking the laws of property ownership; e.g. by trying to break free and run away with one's self which was someone else's legally owned property. the relational social dynamic did not implicate the slave-owners because every individual in Western civilization is deemed 'independent' and fully and solely responsible for their own behaviour. 'justice', with this view of 'self' can only trace the chain of causal events resulting in an 'illegal action' back into the interior of the 'perpetrator' where it 'dead-ends' because of the view of the individual as an 'independently-existing thing-in-itself'.

newtonian science gives us Western moral-judgement based retributive justice.

the 'relations-are-all-there-are' understanding of modern physics gives us indignenous anarchist style 'restorative justice' where the primary author of the harm is understood to be the 'community' (the relational social dynamic, web-of-life or etc.). the relational sourcing of harmful behaviour manifests through the individual; i.e. the individual does not jumpstart author it.
the concept of ‘justice’ is tied up with the concepts of ‘action’ and ‘causation and responsibility’, ... this is complicated by science and its dominance in defining these concepts.

in particular, while modern physics would see forms as ‘relational’ or ‘ecosystemic’ “[In nature]… “the individual parts reciprocally determine one another.”, ... science [mainstream science and scientific thinking] sees forms as ‘real, local, independent structures whose unitary behaviours are causally derived from local internal processes’; e.g. the human body as an independent system.

science’s ‘archetypeal’ view of forms in nature seen as internal process driven and directed systems has led to homologous [intellectual idealization-based] organization structures in governance and commerce, backed by moral judgement based retributive justice which enforces ‘belief’ in them.

because society is a relational dynamic that generates tensions that are different for the different persons due to their differing situation within the relational dynamic, a disturbing behaviour on the part of an individual may indicate that the relational dynamic is putting the pinch on him that it is not putting on others. however, since science holds that the relational dynamic derives from the behaviours of ‘independent individuals’, it can only assume that the source of the disturbance is arising within the individual.

science and moral judgement work together in the assumption that (a) a disturbing (abnormal) behaviour jumpstarts from the interior of the independent individual, and (b) laws may be formulated to prohibit disturbance of the peace arising from departures from normal social relational behaviour.

the key point to observe here is that the action taken to correct ‘disturbing behaviour’ never gets back to the real source of the behaviour; i.e. the relational dynamic, but attempts to correct or eliminate the ‘disturbing behaviour’ by addressing what’s wrong with the individual through whom the behaviour manifests, rather than addressing the relational dynamic whose spring tensions are channelling through individuals who’s situation within the relational dynamic are as if they drew the short straw.

the failure of those ‘in charge of organizing corrective action’ in response to ‘disturbing behaviour’ in society, in directing their efforts to the individuals through whom these disturbing energies channel, rather than to the relational dynamics giving rise to spring tensions which discharge through individuals, ... err in their understanding of the real physical nature of ‘actions’ and ‘causation’ and their 'correctional activities' are thus the source of vicious cycles of ‘incoherence’ in Western civilization.
he world is given only once, and the intellectually idealized categories that we humans come up with can only be subjective; i.e. defined on the basis of their convenience to us.

while western intellectual traditions devise categories to separate out and distinguish between collections of entities with common attributes [and often put them into notional competition with one another], indigenous aboriginal traditions see races in terms of 'opposites within union' that are reciprocally complementary, as in the four colours of the medicine wheel, red man, white man, black man, yellow man. since all must contribute to the World Unum, ... like the four elements of air, fire, earth and water, the four races of man (symbolic for as many as you'd like, as in points on the compass) have complementary gifts/roles that make the world the whole world. indigenous aboriginal myths about the races speak of the potential greatness of the civilization wherein all races come together in harmony.

in this opposites-in-union concept of 'races', there can be no sense of one race being 'superior' to another race, since all are necessary for the world to exist.

the indigenous aboriginal view of 'races' is ecosystemic as in the relations-first view of multiple entities of modern physics. this view 'celebrates the differences' in that it assumes, as in the clan system, that each of the different races or clans has different roles to play which come together as ONE in harmony/unum. [e.g. the turtle clan for knowledge, bear for medicine and wolf for environment etc.]

if one were asked 'which clan are you', there would be no suggestion that this would be used to give more or less privilege, as in the article;

A better position to take would be to try to discover a race-neutral identity word I suppose, such as the new Swedish gender neutral term “Hen”.

diversity (all points of the compass contribute to the circle) would be welcomed.

racism is a problem that goes together with analytical fragmentation.
defining ‘race’ mechanically versus ecosystemically has been a Western cultural choice.

who wants to be a slave and do the dirty work? no-one in the power structure of an authoritarian state. one has to bring slaves in from the outside, as from black africa. hungry, desperate immigrants can also make good slaves. the ruling hierarchy can thus define the categories as they choose.

this is as you say;

“cultural hierarchies define and regulate [the categorizing]”

The concept of ‘the state’ is firmly entrenched in Western culture; i.e. as a kind of fundamental structure in human soceity, and Plato, in ‘The Republic’ uses this concept as the starting point for investigating ‘justice’ [the ‘virtue of an individual and/or a state’] and for defining ‘categories’ or ‘people roles’. His point is that one can see the same principles at work in the case of the state, as in the case of the individual, but these operative principles are more enlarged and show themselves more clearly in the state. So, through the voices of Socrates and Adeimantus (Plato’s brother), this state-based investigative approach plays out as follows;

Glaucon and the rest entreated me by all means not to let the question drop, but to proceed in the investigation. They wanted to arrive at the truth, first, about the nature of justice and injustice, and secondly, about their relative advantages. I told them, what I --really thought, that the enquiry would be of a serious nature, and would require very good eyes. Seeing then, I said, that we are no great wits, I think that we had better adopt a method which I may illustrate thus; suppose that a short-sighted person had been asked by some one to read small letters from a distance; and it occurred to some one else that they might be found in another place which was larger and in which the letters were larger --if they were the same and he could read the larger letters first, and then proceed to the lesser --this would have been thought a rare piece of good fortune.
.
Very true, said Adeimantus; but how does the illustration apply to our enquiry?
.
I will tell you, I replied; justice, which is the subject of our enquiry, is, as you know, sometimes spoken of as the virtue of an individual, and sometimes as the virtue of a State.
.
True, he replied.
And is not a State larger than an individual?
It is.
Then in the larger the quantity of justice is likely to be larger and more easily discernible. I propose therefore that we enquire into the nature of justice and injustice, first as they appear in the State, and secondly in the individual, proceeding from the greater to the lesser and comparing them.
.
That, he said, is an excellent proposal.

* * *

This is worth following for a bit, because one can ‘smell its persisting aromas’ in the modern Western manner in which, as you say; “cultural hierarchies define and regulate [the categorizing]”

* * *

[Socrates, continuing] “And if we imagine the State in process of creation, we shall see the justice and injustice of the State in process of creation also.
.
I dare say.
When the State is completed there may be a hope that the object of our search will be more easily discovered.
.
Yes, far more easily.
But ought we to attempt to construct one? I said; for to do so, as I am inclined to think, will be a very serious task. Reflect therefore.
.
I have reflected, said Adeimantus, and am anxious that you should proceed.
.
A State, I said, arises, as I conceive, out of the needs of mankind; no one is self-sufficing, but all of us have many wants. Can any other origin of a State be imagined?
.
There can I be no other.
Then, as we have many wants, and many persons are needed to supply them, one takes a helper for one purpose and another for another; and when these partners and helpers are gathered together in one habitation the body of inhabitants is termed a State.
.
True, he said.
And they exchange with one another, and one gives, and another receives, under the idea that the exchange will be for their good.
.
Very true.
Then, I said, let us begin and create in idea a State; and yet the true creator is necessity, who is the mother of our invention.
.
Of course, he replied.
Now the first and greatest of necessities is food, which is the condition of life and existence.
.
Certainly.
The second is a dwelling, and the third clothing and the like.
True.
And now let us see how our city will be able to supply this great demand: We may suppose that one man is a husbandman, another a builder, some one else a weaver --shall we add to them a shoemaker, or perhaps some other purveyor to our bodily wants?
.
Quite right.
The barest notion of a State must include four or five men.
Clearly.

* * *

Ok, in the bold highlight comes a key acknowledgement, ‘necessity is the mother of invention’, and this can explain the engendering of either the state-as-machine and/or the relational ecosystem. The ‘state’ implies ‘stasis’ or ‘invention in a space where the invention-inducing conditions are constant. The ecosystemic entity is capable of continuous on-the-fly evolution since the outside-inward orchestrating need or ‘spring tension’ is continually re-inventing a reciprocally complementary inside-outward ‘spring action’ [the dynamics are ‘fluid-dynamics’].

Also, the assumption that that state and the individual have the same basic structure [internal division of labour based functional components and processes] imposes the machine architecture on the individual human, as well, in the Socratic view.

In the continuing dialogue, the argument in favour of specialization [division of labour] is that “one man cannot practise many arts with success”.. Here, there is already an inbuilt notion of one-sided, all-hitting, no-fielding ‘production’ and ‘achievement’ or ‘success’. In other words, ‘need’ [spring tension] and ‘production’ [spring action] are seen by Socrates as two separate things and the former, being taken for granted, goes unmentioned while the focus shifts exclusively to the latter, the productive action as is associated with ‘growth’ [growth, out of the context of the physical reality that the machinery is drawing from the resources of the common living space that engendered the machinery].

In an ecosystem, the name of the game is the sustaining of relational balance wherein spring-tension and spring-action are in reciprocal complementarity, allowing ‘forms’ to evolve, as in storm-cell formation. Another way to state this is in terms that ‘relations’ drive ‘forms’ in an ecosystem whereas ‘forms’ drive ‘relations’ in a mechanical structure such as ‘the state’. In the Republic dialogue, the ‘job responsibility’ is defined first and then the search is on for categories of people with the right stuff for the particular job.

By defining the jobs first, this sets up groupings of attributes that constitute a means of categorizing people [or beasts of burden etc.].

“And our State must once more enlarge; and this time the will be nothing short of a whole army, which will have to go out and fight with the invaders for all that we have, as well as for the things and persons whom we were describing above.
.
Why? he said; are they not capable of defending themselves?
No, I said; not if we were right in the principle which was acknowledged by all of us when we were framing the State: the principle, as you will remember, was that one man cannot practise many arts with success.
.
Very true, he said.
But is not war an art?
Certainly.
And an art requiring as much attention as shoemaking?
Quite true.
And the shoemaker was not allowed by us to be husbandman, or a weaver, a builder --in order that we might have our shoes well made; but to him and to every other worker was assigned one work for which he was by nature fitted, and at that he was to continue working all his life long and at no other; he was not to let opportunities slip, and then he would become a good workman. Now nothing can be more important than that the work of a soldier should be well done. But is war an art so easily acquired that a man may be a warrior who is also a husbandman, or shoemaker, or other artisan; although no one in the world would be a good dice or draught player who merely took up the game as a recreation, and had not from his earliest years devoted himself to this and nothing else?
.
No tools will make a man a skilled workman, or master of defence, nor be of any use to him who has not learned how to handle them, and has never bestowed any attention upon them. How then will he who takes up a shield or other implement of war become a good fighter all in a day, whether with heavy-armed or any other kind of troops?
.
Yes, he said, the tools which would teach men their own use would be beyond price.”

* * *

The White European colonizers who were early participants in the ‘Pyramid/Ponzi scheme’ called ‘sovereigntism’ brought in slaves and second wave immigrants to perform menial tasks. Necessity, as seen by the slaves and immigrants, was the mother of invention that induced them to become, in disproportion, manually labouring workers and menial services providers. Nevertheless, an association developed between the ‘jobs’ which were defined first, and the humans who filled these positions; e.g. manual labour does not require sophisticated skills, therefore, sophisticated skill potentials never get the chance to manifest in the man whose life is fully committed to simple manual labour [necessity has invented him as a manual labourer although necessity invented his white european boss as an accountant, ... someone who keeps count of the productive results of manual labourers].

This brings us to the point that psychologists argue about as to whether the individual’s response to ‘situations’ comes from his fixed internal character traits, or whether they are outside-inwardly induced by the situation he finds himself in [‘situationism’]. Does ‘situationism’ prevail over ‘intentionism’ or does ‘intentionism’ prevail over ‘situationism’? One can see in this, the proverbial ‘nature versus nurture’ paradox.

The United States and other colonized states have shown themselves to be Ponzi schemes wherein those first in the game are first to get wealthy and powerful and become well-travelled and well-read and develop their artistic potentials etc. having cast off the menial tasks to poor, filthy and desperate new arrivals. What does it say on the Statue of Liberty;

"Give me your tired, your poor,
Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,
The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.
Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me”

The immigrant or slave carrying your groceries out to the car might well be a modern Beethoven or Einstein if he had been raised in the privileged situation of early entrants into the Ponzi pyramid.

In other words, as you say;

“cultural hierarchies define and regulate [the categorizing]”

And, the Ponzi scheme known as colonization has given White Europeans lock-in-status [monopolization of capital] which allows whites to ‘invent categories of people’ since ‘necessity is the mother of invention’ and white european capitalists have control over others’ access to necessities, and fashion docking stations that force them to adapt their plug-shaping accordingly, adapted plug-shapes that are then used to categorize them. For many people at the bottom of the Ponzi scheme, the docking stations are prisons and the categorization is ‘the criminal element’. Correlations can then be made to 'genes' so that it 'appears' that genes are the determinant since these 'docking stations' are purely relational and thus non-visible; i.e. we can only see 'what people do' [meanwhile the plug-shaping docking stations are real enough but because they are relational they are not directly visible].

The authoritarian structure aka ‘state’, ‘corporation’, is radically unlike the ecosystem in that they operate as Ponzi schemes wherein ‘docking stations’ are defined that new entrants must adapt themselves as ‘plugs’ that will fit the ‘docking stations’. In other words, the inductive influence of situation prevails over the asserting character trait driven intention. In order to move upwards into less imposing docking stations where one’s plug-shaping is less influenced by the docking station, one has to satisfy whatever the ‘advancement requirements’ (arse-licking protocols) happen to be. This is otherwise known as ‘fascism’, as Thomas Mann describes in ‘Mario and the Magician’ (1929);

“The capacity for self-surrender, he said, for becoming a tool, for the most unconditional and utter self-abnegation, was but the reverse side of that other power to will and to command. Commanding and obeying formed together one single principle, one indissoluble unity; he who knew how to obey knew also how to command, and conversely; the one idea was comprehended in the other, as people and leader were comprehended in one another.”

While one has far more freedom in a material dynamics sense, to travel and do whatever one wants to do after one has ‘licked one’s way to the top’, ... the downside is that one has effectively ‘made a deal with the devil’ [sold one’s soul] since one has committed to sustaining the health and growth of a self-interest driving machine which is bringing new people in at the bottom, exploiting their labours ‘on the way up’ by the promise of advancing their material self-interests, to the point that life as a soul-making journey has been abandoned, resulting in these machine-ripened fruits of society amounting to nothing more than ‘rich sons-of-bitches’;

“The great perplexity of our time, the churning of our age, is that the youth have sensed — for better or for worse — a great social-historical truth: that just as there are useless self-sacrifices in unjust wars, so too is there an ignoble heroics of whole societies: it can be the viciously destructive heroics of Hitler’s Germany or the plain debasing and silly heroics of the acquisition and display of consumer goods, the piling up of money and privileges that now characterizes whole ways of life, capitalist and Soviet.” – Ernest Becker, ‘Denial of Death’

to ‘cut to the quick’ {;-} ... i would say that Socrates made a fundamental error in starting with a machine model [for state and individual] defined as a solution to material needs (food, clothing, shelter), not to mention how much influence this has had on the continuing mindset of Western culture. This has made us the slaves of our own materialist producing machinery, so that our ‘success’ in life is measured in materialist terms even as the machinery that has made [some of us] rich [at the expense of others] is ravaging the common living space that ‘brought us here’ and within which we are inextricably, situationally included;

“In extending his living space in a manner that destroys the space of others, he destroys his own space. Not initially his inside space, his ‘self’, but his outside space, this real outside-of-self which nourishes his ‘inside-of-self’. The protection of this outside space now becomes the condition without which he is unable to pursue the growth of his own powers of being.” — Frédéric Neyrat, ‘Biopolitics of Catastrophe’

What was missed by Socrates, in his stressing of materialist logic which used ‘the state-as-a-production-machine invented to satisfy its internal material needs’ as a basic model for not only ‘community’ but also ‘the human individual’ is, .... ‘instinct’ or ‘relational intuition’ which is sometimes called ‘spirituality’. Nietzsche speaks of Socrates’ fuck-up as follows;

“The moralism of the Greek philosophers from Plato on is pathologically conditioned; so is their reverence for logical argument. Reason equals virtue and happiness, that means merely that one must imitate Socrates and counter the dark appetites with a permanent daylight — the daylight of reason. One must be clever, clear, bright at any price: any concession to the instincts, to the unconscious, leads downward.” – Nietzsche, ‘Twilight of the Idols’

Conclusion:

There is not much use in talking about the genetic characteristics or other internal qualities of a person or of ‘race’, when survival compels people to spend their lives making themselves into plugs that can fit the available docking stations in a global Ponzi scheme [aka the free market capitalist economy], the pyramidal apex of which has been ‘locked-up’ almost exclusively by white European males whose paths in life are laid out ahead of them, not with a succession of stepping stones, but with a succession of arses that must be well-licked in order for advancement to continue.

Science and reason have dominated the shaping of Western society since 380 BCE (the time of writing of ‘The Republic’) which eclipsed the earlier ecosystemic philosophy of Heraclitus (500 BCE).

Necessity is the mother of invention, but nowadays, ‘necessity’ is defined by the experts and ‘Commanders-in-Chief’ who sit in the seat of Supreme Central Authority of the ‘state’ and/or ‘corporation’ who use their ‘centralized intelligence’ to program their machines which offer docking stations to the masses who must then adapt themselves as plug-ins, to keep this clever material production dedicated system humming.

In focusing on the physical, material behaviours required of the specialized participants in the state, Socrates [and Western society] reduced the social dynamic [the understanding of it] from a hitting-fielding dynamic to an all-hitting - no-fielding dynamic [one then feels deprived of a natural ecstasy in rising to the occasion and personally resolving a natural-relational-situation-arising need, that is not present as one shapes oneself into a plug-form dictated by a docking-station in state or corporate machinery that is sustaining a privileged upper-level pyramid apex that promises riches and privileges to you too, in exchange for selling your soul to get up there]. if that is the necessity that serves as the mother of invention to reshape ourselves into a plug to fill whatever docking stations gives us traction for the ass-kissing ascent, we are the reason that the legend of Faust lives on.
Irreducible complexity is resolved by the relations first view of modern physics which is the ‘situationist’ view. That is, irreducible complexity is the description of complex, interdependent physical phenomena wherein several very different ‘forms’ mutually depend on one another. if certain flowers depend on certain bees and those certain bees depend on those certain flowers, if either one were to arrive ahead of the other in the 'evolutionary unfolding', it could not survive, ... therefore these forms must ‘arrive together’ within their matrix of mutual interdependence. so, why not go with the ‘relations-first’ understanding of evolution that is supported by modern physics? relational influence is the stuff that 'field' is made of; i.e. relational influence is non-local, non-visible and non-material and it induces the precipitation of material forms that are local, visible and material.

So, what happens to the ‘intentionism’ view that is also known as ‘mainstream science’, which Nietzsche, Mach, Poincaré, Schroedinger, Bohm and others have bitched about people confusing for reality? Intentionism doesn’t go away with the acknowledging of ‘situationism’ as primary, it is just no longer ‘confused for reality’ [it is recognized as 'appearances' as in a system of intellectual representations that serves as a useful but limited 'operative reality'].

Logical propositions that can be proved true, that constitute ‘mainstream science’, have little to do with ‘reality’; i.e. have little to do with the physical reality of our natural relational experience. As Wittgenstein pointed out, logical propositions are tautologies. The logical propositions of science are not the result of our investigations into natural physical phenomena, ... they are our own pre-requirement that we impose on our manner of investigating prior to undertaking our investigations.

Bottom line: We don’t know ‘how the world works’. In spite of science, ‘life is still something that happens to us while we are busy making other plans’. Science, with its mind-narrowing predictions, may have made this unpredictability worse [e.g. scientific applications interfere with one another and with nature in unanticipated ways that impact the lives of we who are included in this common relational space that we are launching scientific applications in, such interventions bringing about transformations that are not only unanticipated but plain nasty]. Science and intentionalism deal with ‘making these other plans’. Situationism is how what unfolds induces transformation in what is included within what unfolds, including people who are busy making other plans.
he corporation is a hierarchical structure that is notionally driven and directed by a central authority/central intelligence agency that is causally responsible for the action of the whole machine.

in the realist view, we must take this literally, therefore we must reward the head honcho 1000 times the ordinary worker since he is causally responsible for the whole corporate mechanical dynamic.

in the pragmatist idealist view, the real world is relational and structures can form in the relational ground like whirlpools form in a flowing stream. the eye in the centre of the persisting structure is the 'result' rather than the 'cause' of the structural dynamics, therefore whoever sits in that seat in the centre of authority/intelligence is getting a free ride.

if you do a survey of head honcho's, you will find that they almost exclusively 'realists'; i.e. in Western civilization as it currently is, 'realists rule'.

realism as in 'science' is the problem with Western civilization.

it is realism that employs moral judgement based retributive justice to the case of the slave who punches out his slave-master after tensions have built over generations that are now venting through the justifiably angry slave. realism says that the slave is fully and solely responsible for causing injury to the slave-master. pragmatist idealism says; that is an idealized way of looking at it. experience-based intuition informs us that tensions in the relational matrix of society erupt through points that reach their stress limits, ... those points are not the source of the violent release, they erupt so as to reconfigure in a way that sheds some stress.

the realist believes that hurricanes are stirring up trouble in the relational dynamics of the atmosphere. pragmatist idealists believe that that is just a simplified-for-convenience view that ignores the greater reality that the relational dynamics are the source of the visible structure; i.e. relational influence is the ground of reality and being relational, is non-local, non-visible and non-material, but that is just another way of describing gravity fields, electromagnetic/thermal fields, pressure fields etc.

of course, if we were talking about the hierarchical structure of the sovereign state which is also run by 'realists', the guy at the top really does seem to be the causal source of the actions of the whole machine, ... or is it the standing armies and police forces that are there 'to make realist believers out of us all'?

as pragmatist idealists, we see in this an idealism that realists confuse for reality, perhaps due to the self-interest promoting benefits it delivers to them.
Conflict is inherent in nature. The bar-room brawl can start from one incident, perhaps two suitors vying for one pretty girl. Others then come in to try to ‘help straighten things out’ or to administer justice to a one-sided fight. Others then come in to help previous others, and pretty soon there is a general brawl. Intellectual analysis is after the fact, and different people will RE-construct the conflict differently according to their particular values which shape their perspectives.

Rational analysis of anything, including ‘war’, reduces dynamics to one-sided all-hitting, no-fielding dynamics. It RE-constructs what went on in the usual ‘scientific’ mode of providing some ‘rational intentions’ that are purported to be the driving forces. This is subjective analytical backfill that the conquerors reconstruct very differently from the vanquished [e.g. the theme of Howard Zinn’s ‘A People’s History of the United States’] .

Rational analysis is (a) generally unrealistic, and (b) the basis for this article on WWII.

In the real world, the better part of conflict is not intention-driven, therefore we are off base from the get-go when we try to break it down and portray it as being driven by various factions with various political, religious or other “INTENTIONS”.

In psychology, ‘situationism’ disputes the notion that our actions come from our ‘internal character’ which is composed of fixed ‘traits’ that give our behaviour a persisting shape regardless of the situations we find ourselves in. ‘Situationism’ sees it differently; i.e. our character is outside-inwardly shaped from the relational situations we find ourselves included in. Milgram’s ‘obedience to authority’ experiment, Zimbardo’s ‘prisoner’ experiment, the ‘Stockholm Syndrome’ in hostage situations etc. suggests that ‘situationism’ prevails over ‘intentionalism’.

WWII propaganda, for example, stressed the importance of being on the ‘winning side’, declaring oneself on this important issue, and being ‘part of the winning team’ [so that it would look good on one’s record after the win].

In my family history [most were highly cynical of politics], many responded (all were volunteers) in WWII as one would respond if an infant fell into a rushing stream just upstream from you and you were SITUATIONALLY INDUCED, naturally, to rise to the occasion and assist in the rescue. there is no ‘intentionalist bin’ to toss this into. In fact, conflict can be purely relational and there is no need to bin it into a concept called ‘war’. In nature, conflict is ever present. At what point does conflict become ‘war’? When politicians ‘DECLARE WAR’? What if politicians don’t both to declare war? It’s gone out of fashion, but global conflict is ‘alive and well’.

That’s because sovereign states are not formally initiating conflicts anymore, ... they are in defensive mode because weaker sovereign states are no longer choosing to launch Charge of the Light Brigade suicide attacks by declaring war against world powers and their alliances. Rebel activity is the leading instigator of conflict, and such actions can trigger avalanche-like bar-room brawls in an already tensioned (for many reasons) relational social matrix. Sovereign state politicians can do their backing of rebel groups by stealth.

From Eisenhower’s CIA-led unseating of Iran’s Mossadegh through Reagan’s support for Contras to Putin’s backing of Crimean rebels, ‘war’ has been moving into the subterranean, like fire in a peat bog that descends down to where you can’t fight it and the only sign is wisps of smoke rising up from fissures and hotness under foot.

Interpretation of WWII have to take into account the unsophisticated racism of the times which helped to simplify polarizing propaganda which is essential to building up the scale of the conflict to a world-class rating.

For example, Churchill was a background influence in engineering harsh punitive terms against the Germans in the ‘Treaty of Versailles’ (1919) at the end of WWI since he saw the Germans as a ‘warlike race’ that their European neighbours needed to ‘cripple’ so that the Germans could not rise up and wage war again. Of course, many others predicted that subjecting the upcoming generation of Germans, merely because of their race, to contempt and harsh terms, would guarantee another war by the time these babes born into original sin (in the moral racial judgement of France, Britain etc.) reached the age of majority.

During the war, Churchill followed up in promoting these racist views in his speeches with broad enough brush strokes to capture the entire demographic of Germany. e.g. in 1941 Churchill said in a public speech;

"There are less than 70,000,000 malignant Huns, some of whom are curable and others killable, most of whom are already engaged in holding down Austrians, Czechs, Poles and the many other ancient races they now bully and pillage." Later that year Churchill referred to the invasion of the Soviet Union as "the dull, drilled, docile brutish masses of the Hun soldiery, plodding on like a swarm of crawling locusts.”

Racism was more overt in the ‘Good War’, and the negative branding of entire nations of peoples; Huns, Wops and Japs, contrasts with today’s typical propaganda to back undeclared wars (invasions, interventions etc.); “We are going in to assist the good citizens of Grenada, Panama, Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria, Libya, who have had the misfortune of being taken over by a gang of thugs.

People like George Carlin have been making life difficult for politicians by discrediting the tactic of overt racism, making it too obvious a form of propaganda to get any traction even with people prone to racist thinking.

Propaganda used in WWII was laughable even a decade later; e.g. Political posters included such slogans as; “Our Job is to Get the Hun”.

Of course, white supremacism is still pervasive, as it was when Churchill was testifying to the Peel Commission on the ethics of colonialism which promotes the view that superior races should have priority access to land;

"I do not agree that the dog in a manger has the final right to the manger even though he may have lain there for a very long time. I do not admit that right. I do not admit for instance, that a great wrong has been done to the Red Indians of America or the black people of Australia. I do not admit that a wrong has been done to these people by the fact that a stronger race, a higher-grade race, a more worldly wise race to put it that way, has come in and taken their place." – Winston Churchill, Martin Gilbert's 'Churchill and The Jews'. The source of the quote is the Peel Commission Report, proof copy of Churchill's evidence: Churchill papers, 2/317

WWII propaganda, orienting to demonization of the enemy on a racial basis was so obviously propaganda that soon after WWII, people would break out laughing at how simple-minded it invited you to be; the rules of propaganda during WWII (which can be browsed, for example, at the google site “propaganda in wwii”) were Disneyesque, supporting the ‘situationist’ view of behaviour;

Propaganda Techniques:
.
1. Demonization: This is when the artist portrays an individual as a demon or some form of a monster.
.
2. Emotional Appeal: This is when the viewers emotions are being used in order to have them agree with the message. E.g. Poster showing that thousands of Americans have died by the hands of the Germans.
.
3. Patriotic Appeal: This is when the artist appeals to the love of one's country. Usually has a country's flag or some form of representation for that country. Eg: American Flag or American soldier.
.
4. Name Calling: This is when the artist calls other group of people by derogatory names. Ex: Germans are called Huns and the Japanese are called Japs. Japs has a bad connotation or meaning.
.
5. Appeal to Fear: It seeks to build support and unites a group of people by instilling fear in the general population. It scares Americans, for example, into believing that the war has to be fought otherwise they will be invaded by monstrous Germans and Japanese.
.
6. Catchy Slogan: The artist uses phrases or words in order to grab the viewer's attention. These slogans are also very easy to remember and have a very clear message. It also plays on the prejudice or racism that exists against these people. Eg: Remember the Lusitania!
.
7. Bandwagon: When the audience is told that everyone else is doing it. It makes the audience (Americans) want to be a part of the crowd and to not feel left out. Eg: poster saying that victory is inevitable, so you should join and support the cause to be on the winning side.

So, is it not kind of silly to analyze WWII in terms of it being 'caused' by ‘political intentions’?

As Nietzsche points out;

“That which gives the extraordinary firmness to our belief in causality is not the great habit of seeing one occurrence following another but our inability to interpret events otherwise than as events caused by intentions. It is belief in the living and thinking as the only effective force–in will, in intention–it is belief that every event is a deed, that every deed presupposes a doer, it is belief in the “subject.” Is this belief in the concept of subject and predicate not a great stupidity?” —Friedrich Nietzsche, ‘The Will to Power’

WWII was one the flare-ups in a sea of continuing troubled relations. It was a large flare-up like the major volcanic eruptions that occur when tensions continue to build without sufficient small releases, and then release in ‘the big one’.

The author of this article uses the common tactic of inverting the physically real order of things by reducing WWII to an ‘event-in-itself’. This is like saying that ‘hurricanes’ are stirring up the atmosphere. The physical reality is that the atmosphere is stirring up hurricanes. It is, as Nietzsche says, a ‘great stupidity’ to impute subjecthood to activities such as WWII and then make them out to be ‘causal agents’ that author ‘effects’; i.e. Price says;

“[WWII] is often referred to as the “Good War” or even the “Last Good War.” ... Of course, the war is long over. But its effects are still being felt, and thinking it through may help us to deal with current issues ... Conclusion The Second World War created the world we now live in” ... yada yada yada”

Interesting, ... others would say that The world we now live in, which has been ongoing for quite a while since the world is only given once, as a transforming relational activity continuum, ... has created the Second World War

Once one gives a name to an activity (system) within a larger relational activity (suprasystem), whether it be ‘Katrina’ or WWII, creating a notional ‘thing-in-itself’ and treating it as a ‘causal agent’, one is then obliged to explain its causal agency in terms of its internal components and processes. This is called ‘analytical inquiry’ and it is commonly ungrounded in ‘synthetical inquiry’ (Ackoff, Systems Sciences), implying that it is ‘all-hitting, no-fielding’ inquiry.

One can explain all manner of things using this inverted-from-actual ordering of things vantage point, and it is only self-discipline that keeps one from going all the way from the sublime to the ridiculous. Thankfully, Price uses a bit of restraint;

“The underlying problems of the world capitalist system were not solved by the Second World War” Hmm, ... that’s only because those problems didn’t stop when the war stopped, otherwise the author surely could have worked that in too.

That is, Price figures he’s got a good handle on what ‘war’ is as a 'thing-in-itself'; i.e. he portrays war as what happens when ‘imperialist intentions’ clash (and sprinkles in some fine tuning from qualitative differences between the polar factions);

“So the Second World War cannot be seen as just a good, anti-fascist, war—not without denying the imperialism, oppression, racism, and exploitation of the Allied side. But it cannot be simply described as an inter-imperialist war. Such a description, while accurate, is too abstract. There was a qualitative difference between the two sides. For humanity’s sake, it was better for the Axis power to lose the war. Enormous numbers of people saw themselves as fighting for their freedom”

Oh, really? Why exactly was it better for the Allies to win? Was it because of what Churchill said; i.e. that the proper evolutionary progression is for “a stronger race, a higher-grade race, a more worldly wise race to put it that way, has come in and taken their place." After all, racism was huge and out there on the surface during the WWII era.

I agree that the cultural genocide approach to those popularly deemed the inferior races favoured by the British and its Allies [which at the same time elevates those doing the evaluating to the 'superior races'] seems less harsh than the physical racial genocide of the Nazis, but that’s not the point. The point is that the mere suggestion of ‘who should win’ accepts the winner-loser binary concept that is foundational to authoritarianism AND social darwinism [evolution by incessant competition featuring ‘survival of the fittest’], as has been built into ‘colonization’ from its inception and persists into the modern era.

‘Survival of the fittest’, a dualist concept in which ‘inhabitant’ and ‘habitat’ are notionally split apart and ‘independent’ of one another, so that the ‘inhabitants’, now seen as independent from one another and the habitat, had to compete amongst themselves for access to the nurturances of the habitat. This was in contrast to the ecosystemic view where mutual INTERdependence was primary in nature; i.e. where;

The dynamics of the inhabitants are conditioning the dynamics of the habitat at the same time as the dynamics of the habitat are conditioning the dynamics of the inhabitants” – Mach’s principle

The ‘survival of the fittest’ principle cropped up a century prior to Darwin’s 1859 “On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life”, in an economic context, in Adam Smith’s 1776 Work, “An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations”. Smith says;

“Every species of animals naturally multiplies in proportion to the means of their subsistence, and no species can ever multiply beyond it. But in civilized society it is only among the inferior ranks of people that the scantiness of subsistence can set limits to the further multiplication of the human species; and it can do so in no other way than by destroying a great part of the children which their fruitful marriages produce.” —Adam Smith

That this binary win/lose game-play termed ‘competition’ is inevitable is implicitly assumed in Price’s acceptance of ‘war’ as a ‘real, binary event’ wherein EITHER one side OR the other must win which then defines the other as the ‘loser’.

But this concept of binary polar opposition is intellectual fabrication and it cannot be found in the physical reality of our natural experience. It is a language convention that is convenient in that it ignores the real-world complexity of relational dynamics.

For example, the relational influence of fields is non-local, non-visible and non-material, but it is the ‘primary’ physical reality;

“Fields of force are the primary reality, and ‘matter’ a secondary or derived phenomenon” —Michael Faraday

“What we observe as material bodies and forces are nothing but shapes and variations in the [relational] structure of space. Particles are just schaumkommen (appearances).”– Erwin Schroedinger

“A thrown stone is, from this point of view, a changing field, where the states of greatest field intensity travel through space with the velocity of the stone” —Albert Einstein

When relational influence sources conflict, the conflict appears to be binary; e.g. the relational tensions in the earth give rise to ‘plate tectonics’ which we describe, for example, as ‘the Pacific plate colliding with the North American plate’ and ‘causing earthquakes’; i.e. this war between the plates aka ‘earthquake’ is not an ‘event in itself’ that ‘causes destruction’ and changes the landscape, ... the order of influence is the opposite; i.e. the changing landscape is causing this war between the plates.

Of course, since I am standing on the North American plate, I would prefer that the North American plate prevail over the Pacific plate and take that sucker down so that I could remain 'the king of the castle'.

Summary:

‘War’ is not an ‘event-in-itself’. Popular language usage presents it as an ‘event-in-itself’ that ‘causes destruction’ and ‘changes the world’ but such language usage employs intellectual idealization that is inverted to the physical reality of our natural experience. Ongoing relational social tensions give rise to sporadic eruptions of violence which we capture, in our noun-and-verb Indo-European language-and-grammar constructs, in terms of the collision of binary polar factions. In WWII, this capture was in terms of ‘the Axis and the Allies’, analogous to ‘the Pacific plate and the North American plate’.

This binary view is only possible if we intellectually impose ‘independent being’ status on each of the two opposing participants. In the physical reality of our natural experience, there is no such thing as ‘independent being’. We say, for convenience, that ‘mountains erode’, or that ‘valleys fill with sediment’ for convenience, when the reality is that the terrain is relationally transforming and it is only intellectual idealization supported by intellectual subject-verb-predicate constructs that allows us to break a relational dynamic, notionally, into two polar opposing parts.

It is not a problem to use the concept of war as a pragmatic idealization of a more complex relational dynamic, but it is a problem to treat it as if it were ‘real’, as a ‘subject’, and depict it as a causal author of this, that and the other. Such confusing of pragmatic idealization for 'reality', is, to quote Nietzsche, ‘a great stupidity’.

Once we start treating our pragmatic idealized ‘binary opposition’ as ‘real’ so that there is a clear ‘winner’ and a clear ‘loser’, we start musing as to which party would be the better one to ‘win’ or which would be the better to ‘lose’, as Price is doing;

There was a qualitative difference between the two sides. For humanity’s sake, it was better for the Axis power to lose the war.

Who says there needs to be a winner or loser? In other words, who says the two factions are ‘independent’ of one another? Does nature work by ‘master and slave’ division? If there were only one race of people in the world, there would still be eruptions of conflict, but in this case conflict would be like Heraclitus maintained as “opposites in union” [coincidentia oppositorum] which resolve in harmony as in the spring-tension --- spring-action of the bow or lyre;

“The name of the bow (biós) is life (bíos), but its work is death.

In the case of the U.S. civil war, was this the case of a union pulling apart like drawing the string back on a musical instrument, or was it the case of two independent factions polarizing against one another?

If it was the latter, then why would one not assume that ‘all wars are civil wars’ and see the Axis and Allies in the same manner?

Evidently, the intellectual idealization of binary opposition, in our Western culture, is something we confuse for ‘reality’, in which case, ‘win/lose competition’ becomes a ‘reality’, as it is in Adam Smith’s capitalist “Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations” where he comes up with the idea that binary win/lose competition is at the base of it all, an 'intellection-trumps-reality' view which Darwin followed suit on.

After we have listened to all of this academic jibber jabber by Price, built on top of the imputed ‘reality’ of binary opposition, we may be mentally worn down enough to succumb to his assertion that there must be a ‘winner’ and a ‘loser’. Once we accept this, we have closed down all possibilities of ‘anarchism’ since the ‘winner’ becomes the ‘master’ in Price’s analysis and the ‘loser’ becomes the ‘slave’; i.e. treating binary polar competition as ‘real’ is the basis by which one defines authoritarian structure.

Binary polar opposition is intellectual idealization that is not found in the physical reality of our natural relational experience. Opposites-in-union that pull away from the inherent union characterize the transforming relational activity continuum that modern physics associates with the physical reality of our natural experience. This is the structure of convection cells in flow and stars and planets in the celestial dynamic;

“[In nature]… “the individual parts reciprocally determine one another.” … “The properties of one mass always include relations to other masses,” … “Every single body of the Universe stands in some definite relations with every other body in the Universe.” Therefore, no object can “be regarded as wholly isolated.” And even in the simplest case, “the neglecting of the rest of the world is impossible.” – Ernst Mach

“Space not only conditions the behaviour of inert masses, but is also conditioned in its state by them”—Albert Einstein

The word ‘war’ refers to an activity, ‘warring’, but we have the habit of converting activities into nouns and inverting the ordering of things from how they transpire in nature; i.e. once we use language-and-grammar to reify and re-animate the relational forms in the relational world, we make it appear as if the relational forms are the creators of the relational world which, in fact engendered the relational forms;

“Our judgement has us conclude that every change must have an author”;–but this conclusion is already mythology: it separates that which effects from the effecting. If I say “lightning flashes,” I have posited the flash once as an activity and a second time as a subject, and thus added to the event a being that is not one with the event but is rather fixed, “is” and does not “become.”–To regard an event as an “effecting,” and this as being, that is the double error, or interpretation, of which we are guilty.” – Nietzsche, ‘Will to Power’, 531

So, in the ‘final analysis’, where Price concludes;

”The Second World War created the world we now live in”

One would have to say, ‘NO!’, the world is only given once and it is the world we now live in that created The Second World War’.

In other words, Price’s entire analysis is ass-backwards.
thanks biceps critic. meanwhile, my experience is that few people see that there is a problem in objectifying ‘actions’ as ‘actions-in-themselves’ or ‘utterances’ as ‘utterances-in-themselves’. Western moral judgement based justice is founded on objectivity whereby ‘actions-in-themselves’ and/or ‘utterances-in-themselves’ ‘speak-for themselves’ [have objective meaning in themselves]. george carlin thinks that is a joke; ... “the word ‘nigger’ is not bad-in-itself, .. richard pryor and eddie murphy use the word ‘nigger’ all the time. it’s the racist that you have to worry about, but not everyone that utters the word ‘nigger’ is racist.” carlin has nietzsche on his side;

“an action in itself is quite devoid of value ; the whole question is this: who performed it? One and the same ” crime ” may, in one case, be the greatest privilege, in the other infamy. As a matter of fact, it is the selfishness of the judges which interprets an action (in regard to its author) according as to whether it was useful or harmful to themselves (or in relation to its degree of likeness or unlikeness to them).”— Nietzsche on ‘Morality’ and ‘Herd Behaviour’ in ‘The Will to Power’

objectivity is the foundation of Western moral judgement based retributive justice; i.e. ‘objectivity’ is the intellectual idealizing process by which we synthetically remove the figure from the ground, the content from the context, the hitting from the fielding, and insist that the meaning of an ‘action’ or ‘utterance’ resides fully and solely in the ‘action’ or ‘utterance’, as if the observer-recipient-interpreter-historian-analyst has no influence on the interpretation or assignment of meaning. SNL scores laughs off the notion that ‘sexual harassment’ can be objectively determined by ‘utterances-in-themselves’ and/or ‘actions-in-themselves’, out of the context of the spin that the recipient wants to put on these, but people still lose their jobs or go to jail based on the belief that there is objective meaning in the ‘utterance-in-itself’ and/or ‘the action-in-itself’.

Price, in converting an ‘activity’ into a noun-subject in the case of WWII and then portraying it as a ‘causal agency’ is following the common practice, which is absurd, but which has degrees of absurdity, which Price is pushing to the limit.

That is, noun-and-verb Indo-European/Scientific language and grammar is built to synthetically convert activities into object-beings. In flow-base languages, the ‘manning’ (human as a relational activity within the transforming relational activity continuum) retains his identity as an activity within the larger activity of Nature, but in noun-and-verb language-and-grammar, the ‘manning’ (verb) is reduced to ‘man’ (noun) and instead of being like the sailboater that derives his power and steerage from the relational activity plenum he is an included relational sub-activity within, he takes on the imperial robes of the powerboater, who claims to be an independently-existing causal agent whose powers derive from his own internal components and processes. We can thank Western ‘science’ for making a ‘science’ out of that language-based witchcraft.

“Indeed, nothing has yet possessed a more naive power of persuasion than the error concerning being, as it has been formulated by the Eleatics, for example. After all, every word and every sentence we say speak in its favor. Even the opponents of the Eleatics still succumbed to the seduction of their concept of being: Democritus, among others, when he invented his atom. “Reason” in language — oh, what an old deceptive witch she is! I am afraid we are not rid of God because we still have faith in grammar.” – Nietzsche, ‘Twilight of the Idols’

So, we can hardly fault Wayne Price for doing to the activity known as World War II; i.e. slipping it out of the relational activity continuum and deploying it as if had objective causal powers in its own right; i.e. Western people do it to themselves.

Turning relational activities into noun-subjects, notionally with their own causal agency, is the modus operandi of the language game we call ‘science’. And no wonder, then, that Alex Gorrion accuses science of being a ‘religion’ and that Ernst Mach, as he put it, ‘quit the Church of Physics’. Objectifying the ‘manning’, as science does, is intellectual idealization that imputes the sourcing of his agency to be coming from his internal components and processes, depicting him as an ‘independent’ powerboater, unlike the ‘manning’, a ‘sailboater’ that depends on the relational dynamics aka ‘habitat’ that he is situationally included in for his ‘agency’. The depicting of the ‘manning’ as an ‘independently-existing man’ with his own internal process driven and directed behaviour recapitulates the ‘man’ of the religious Creation myth of Islam, Christianity and Judaism. Science is religion.

In fact, as Whorf and Nietzsche and others have pointed out, ‘science’ and ‘religion’ come from noun-and-verb Indo-European language-and-grammar;

“It is sometimes stated that Newtonian space, time, and matter are sensed by everyone intuitively, whereupon relativity is cited as showing how mathematical analysis can prove intuition wrong. This, besides being unfair to intuition, is an attempt to answer offhand question (1) put at the outset of this paper, to answer which this research was undertaken. Presentation of the findings now nears its end, and I think the answer is clear. The offhand answer, laying the blame upon intuition for our slowness in discovering mysteries of the Cosmos, such as relativity, is the wrong one. The right answer is: Newtonian space, time, and matter are no intuitions. They are receipts from culture and language. That is where Newton got them.” – Benjamin Whorf, ‘The Relation of Habitual Thought and Behavior to Language

Writers like Price, who take to the extreme this ‘great stupidity’ of making relational activities into noun-subjects notionally equipped with their own innate causal agency, do us a favour by exposing this M.O. for what it is, a scam.

so, you and i and a few others, plus quite a few dead philosophers, may see the practice of imputing causal agency to activities made over into ‘independent things-in-themselves’ by language [e.g. humans, states, corporations], but the religion of science has been steadily picking up believing followers.

in fact, its not a question of ‘either/or’, as Poincaré made clear, it’s a question of ‘pragmatist idealists’ versus ‘realists’. The former find science to be useful intellectual idealization which should not be confused for reality while the latter believe that science is grounded in ‘reality’. In other words, the latter ignore Mach’s warning;

“We … should beware lest the intellectual machinery, employed in the representation of the world on the stage of thought, be regarded as the basis of the real world.” – Ernst Mach

unfortunately, what Western society, including academia, formally adopts as its ‘standard’ is the ‘realist’ view of science, and it is this stance that makes science into religion.

By considering ‘time’ as a real container, we can populate it with ‘objectified activities’ called ‘events’ such as WWII, imputing to them their own ‘causal agency’ and thus reconstructing the unfolding of the world in the one-sided terms of selected events and calling this reconstruction ‘history’. As Howard Zinn points out in ‘A People’s History of the United States’, this objectifying of activities within the relational activity continuum and endowing them with their own notional causal agency is an ‘objectification’ that is purely ‘subjective’. What the colonizers lay out as key constructive events in the developing history of a wonderful new world in North America will be depicted by the indigenous colonized people as contributing the destruction of a wonderful established world on Turtle Island. This is the ambiguity inherent in ‘objectifying activities (verbs) within the relational activity continuum, as ‘actions’ or ‘events’ (nouns), ... addressed by Nietzsche;

“As a matter of fact, it is the selfishness of the judges which interprets an action (in regard to its author) according as to whether it was useful or harmful to themselves (or in relation to its degree of likeness or unlikeness to them).”— Nietzsche on ‘Morality’ and ‘Herd Behaviour’ in ‘The Will to Power’

Finally, thanks for having the confidence to be a heretic in a forum in which even ‘anarchism’ is governed by political correctness with religious overtones.
There are two way of understanding the One world, and the division between ‘anarchists’ and ‘capitalists’ could be captured in these terms; i.e. in the terms of the essentially differing ways in which anarchist versus capitalist understand the same world.

Nowhere is this more in a state of public confusion (flip-flop thinking) today than in the northern part of Turtle Island, in the place called ‘Canada’. And, by the way, I employed a geographic reference first because the geographic feature of the island persists no matter how many sovereigntist states politically minded people dream up and make into religious icons that the different cults swear to give their lives to defend the (notional) ‘independent existence of’.

As Spanish anarchists (and I am using ‘spanish’ as a geographical and not political reference) make note, in ‘nihilist recuperation’, in order to destroy authoritarianism, it is not sufficient to attack and bring down material structures, ... one must destroy the relations that have given rise to them so that they are not rebuilt over and over again each time insurrection brings them down.

Wait a minute, ... this sounds like ‘cultural genocide’ does it not? And this term is being used in justice-seeking initiative undertaken by people in northern turtle island, but kind of ‘in the opposite direction’. If a turtle island anarchist insurrection is to be successful, one measure of such success will be that there will be no rebuilding of the troublesome material structures in Washington and Ottawa, ... the temples of Christian Nationalism which are the pillars of capitalism for that is where the laws commoditizing the continuous terrain are written and the commanders in chief of the standing armies and police forces that apply negative moral judgement to those, designated as criminals or terrorists of offenders, whose behaviour is in violation of those laws. In these temples are the high priests of a religious cults who contend that these ‘sovereigntist’ structures, these ‘independent sovereign states’ with internal ‘supreme central authority’ – directed organizational behaviour, are so important that one must give one’s life to defend against heretics that deny its authority, and to bear arms and kill as many heretics as one can (we don’t want them to keep coming back and undermining the very existence of our sovereign state, the structure that makes it more difficult for another, bigger and stronger cult, to simply swallow and assimilate it, like the British Empire when it tried to assimilate the new cults forming in mid turtle island).

So, ‘cultural genocide’ could mean one of two things (a) the program, launched by anarchists, to destroy the relational habits of the authoritarian culture of building and rebuilding material physical structures and organizations to house ‘supreme central authorities’ who ‘rule by law’ backed by standing armies and police forces, ... or (b) the program, launched by sovereigntists, to destroy the infidels that do not value the intellectual concept of the objective existence of the sovereign state, more than their own lives.

The (b) version of cultural genocide has always been part of colonization programs, so the people of northern turtle island in the place called ‘canada’ are really confused, because they have been going through a ‘Truth and Reconciliation program’ where the ‘First Nations’ peoples (the indigenous aboriginal peoples of turtle island, who have rejected the sovereigntist religious cultism) are asking, ... get this, ... the high priests of the sovereigntist cult that they don’t recognize, ... to ‘do something’ to help restore and revitalize a culture that rejects the basic premises of Christian nationalism, the religious cultist pillar of global capitalism.

Is this not akin to Druids appealing to the Pope for assistance in revitalizing paganism?

Of course there has been (b) type cultural genocide, it is only logical and the sovereigntists are people who put intellectual logical concepts (such as ‘independent existence of defined and name-labelled objects such as ‘the state’ with its supreme central authority ordained by a supernatural God) in the core of their belief and relational organizing practices, practices that, unless anarchists can be successful in exterminating; i.e. in a cultural genocide initiative, will keep those material structures and physical organizations driven and directed by a supreme central authority that controls their realms by imposing behaviour-governing laws backed up by standing armies and police forces.

An anarchist cannot dilly dally over which cultural genocide initiative must take precedence over which. One can’t be part of both at the same time. The self-defined ‘government of canada’ said it was sorry, not about the cultural genocide program per se (of course they want to get rid of infidels who, because they are not with the sovereigntist program are against it), .. but about the messiness of the residential school program that not only emphasized the worthlessness of the indigenous anarchist ways, but left the little indian girls and boys to die of neglect and just plain fucked up their minds with sexual abuse and other treatments of them to show how worthless they were in their anarchist cultural mode, ... to given them a gradient that would encourage them to join the ranks of the civilized authoritarian, capitalist sovereigntists and to become part of the chorus singing praise to an intellectual concept whose sustained independent being was more important than one’s own life.

It was the messiness, not the cultural genocide that extracted the apology from the government. If only they had had some clean technology like a star-trek style neural reprogramming unit, where happy little indian kids could come in and sit under a laser-firing hair-dryer for a few minutes, and leave as happy little capitalist sovereigntist kids, ... there wouldn’t have to be any apologies for that. Of course you are going to apologize if you set out to cut a dog’s balls off and you leave a bunch of dogs in agony with their intestines hanging out. Cortez and his men could have used some of those neural reprogramming units, ... or maybe not. They would probably have set the units aside at least long enough to allow a modicum of rape, plunder, mayhem and playful torture that is taken as the right and privilege of those having achieved a position of power and domination over others.

There is a strange atmosphere of politeness in the north of turtle island where two factions whose beliefs take them towards the cultural genocide of one another, speak of ‘living as two nations side-by-side’ (not saying whose definitions of ‘nation’ one is using) while the reality is that the two peoples are interspersed and the actions are interpermeating over a vast region ‘from sea to sea to sea’. Nevertheless, this sort of thing happens, the more one moves towards the land of the midnight sun, and when one group is partying the other group wants to party with them. The indigenous anarchists asks the colonizing sovereigntist; “hey, what ‘r you guys celebrating there, ... that’s a lot of cold beer you got laid out on the ice” and the colonizing sovereigntist replies; “we are celebrating the anniversary of the day we established perpetual dominion over all of these lands that range from sea to sea to sea and legislated, mountie-backed control over everyone who sets foot on it, along with our sworn commitment to subdue and kill, if necessary, anyone who actively challenges this God-blessed sovereigntist enterprise.” At which point the indigenous anarchist politely asks; ... “can we party with you?”

This atmosphere of ‘politeness’ surfaces in this article in the author’s following comment, which does not resonate with the experience of a Druid living in the Vatican, who would be bloody appreciative of just being able to refresh his sanity by meeting up with and talking about the weather (the coming solstice) with other Druids. That is, anarchism is a state of mind first, and a set of physical material structures and organizations second. If some power smashes down anarchism, there is no danger that the same old anarchist structures are going to be rebuilt, as when anarchist insurrection brings down capitalist structural cores inhabited by supreme central authorities which are promptly rebuilt. In anarchism, relations are in precedence over material structures. The author speaks for his group, saying “his existence is interdependent with capitalism”.

We might identify as revolutionaries, anti-capitalists, anarchists, [insert label here]'ists; however, we are complicit in the capitalist system no matter how many dumpsters are liberated, nor how well you have the theory down pat. The sheer fact is that in part we are all still forced to co-exist within the capitalist system. Our existence is in no way independent of capitalism, and we all interact with that system on a daily basis. Our political ideologies compete in relation to capitalism, and capitalism frames our daily discourse”

What’s this thing called ‘existence’? Don’t relations come before existential material structures in anarchism?

What’s this thing called ‘political ideology’? Is it comprised of ‘the rules of how to build material structures which will then dominate and direct the behaviours of the people who have designed and who operate the material structures’?

As a Druid in the Vatican, they may have legislated control over money and wages and the right to own property and to exploit such ownership by using the fact that people depend on access to the nurturing resources of the land, ... to extort services from them to accumulate money to take control over more property and steadily build the extortion business, ... but,... while they can take the Druid out of the woods, they can’t take the woods out of the Druid. One night of pounding drums around the fire to prepare one’s spirits for when the first rays of the morning sun make their way down through a narrow shaft in a carefully arranged stone structure, as they do only once in each cycle of the seasons, ... is enough to instil for a lifetime, for yet another generation, the understanding of our common inclusion in a life-giving relational harmony.

How silly is it then, to look at all these sovereigntist or Christian nationalist cults, with their cult-built core structures, tabernacles called ‘parliament’ or ‘seat of government’ wherein supposedly resides a continuing mysterious presence of the ‘supreme central authority’ which whispers in the ear of the continuing sequence of people who ‘dress in the robes of office’ and holding the ‘commander-in-chief sceptre’, deliver utterances in the manner of the oracle of Delphi, ... not the ambiguous kind that make you think about your life experience and in such reflection, have your behaviour move more into resonance with the natural unfolding, ... but the explicit kind that says; “you will fucking do this exactly as my edict demands, or you will be incarcerated in the pen of bum-fucking pigs, the designation that awaits you as well, and/or be hung, poisoned, electrocuted or just shot.

With each one of these 193 ‘independently existing object states’ claiming to be animated by a ‘supreme central authority’, is there not some ‘exaggeration’ going on here that could lead to irresolvable stand-offs, like when states start chucking their garbage in the direction of inside-to-outside and disagree on their definitions of ‘inside-to-outside’? Will the real ‘supreme central authority’ please rise.... . Or, since all of this material structure building is ‘reason-based’, maybe the sovereign states will be left with the principle of Lafontaine to answer such a question; i.e. “La raison du plus fort est toujours la meilleure’.

Whether I discover myself a Druid in the Vatican or an anarchist on turtle island, I will find both solace and spirit recharging nurturing in finding my way to campfire get-togethers with others who are not, in their heart of hearts, lackeys to the particular capitalist-sovereigntist cult beliefs, that proclaim this territory to be blah blah blah blah ... by edict of blah blah blah blah.... extending from this imaginary line blah blah blah , in which all who step on these grounds must comply with yada yada yada.

Who gives a fuck about “political ideologies’ as in “Our political ideologies compete in relation to capitalism, and capitalism frames our daily discourse”

The beauty of getting together around the anarchist campfire is that the cultural genocide program as in (a) is not needed.

(a) the program, launched by anarchists, to destroy the relational habits of the authoritarian culture of building and rebuilding material physical structures and organizations to house ‘supreme central authorities’ who ‘rule by law’ backed by standing armies and police forces, ... or (b) the program, launched by sovereigntists, to destroy the infidels that do not value the intellectual concept of the objective existence of the sovereign state, more than their own lives.

evidently, like the Druids in the Vatican, turtle island anarchists only have to ignite the campfire and ‘they will come’. The (b) kind of cultural genocide is the burden of going with a control-based approach, because once you have declared a supreme central authority basis for your social organizing, if there are, interspersed within the borders of the sovereign state, individuals that are not following centrally issued edicts, these people who “are not with you”, are “against you”; i.e. they are infidels that interfere with sovereigntist efforts to ‘make the elephant dance’, to have the collective move in a herd-like manner. These interspersed people are like the clusters of pilings that serve as a breakwater, or the cluster of mounds on the mountain that interfere and disperse the rock collective wherein individuals get moving in unison in the same direction and in so doing generate huge power. Sure, it is dumb power, but it is huge power, avalanche class power, that make smaller collectives step aside because they know that ‘a lot of groups didn’t and a lot of groups died’.

Sitting around an anarchist campfire on turtle island, there is no intellectual reality based veneer thinly covering the pretense of God-blessed Supreme Central Authority; i.e. one doesn’t hear talk like on fox news; “Canadians are lucky we allow them to exist on the same continent." ... "Without the U.S., Canada is essentially Honduras, but colder and much less interesting" ... “Instead of following politics the average Canadian is busy dogsledding.". These are phrases which drew clever retorts such as “Fuck the Americans and shit in their graves”. But, of course, if those in the core material structure, the tabernacle in which resides the Supreme Central Authority of the United States sovereigntist cult, wanted to seize ownership of the whole continent, they could do it, just as in Iraq and Afghanistan, inheriting with such blunt exercise of dumb avalanche power, some minor overheads of continuing on-the-ground occupation in lieu of a successful cultural reprogramming initiative (i.e. a program of cultural genocide to cleanse the socket to prepare it for plugging in the United-States-culture neural-reprogramming model).

As the Zapatistas figured out, making anarchist campfires that pull together dispersed and isolated anarchists into self-managing clusters seems to be an easier way to go than an (a) type program of cultural genocide where one not only has to collapse the tabernacles and their ancillary regulatory structures, but to smoke out and exterminate the dispersed cultist-spirit that lingers on in cracks and crannies, the phantom spirit of a dispersed supreme central authority, because even when dispersed, these spirits can re-agglomerate and pretty soon you got more fucking sovereigntist tabernacles that dot the landscape like fire-ant hills that you kicked the shit out of ten times already, each one claiming to be ‘independently-existing’ with its behaviour directed by a ‘supreme central authority’, and insisting that they didn't get to where they are by NOT knowing that good stuff must flow from outside-to inside and that shit must flow from inside-to-outside, and gearing up to settle any arguments over the defining of ‘inside’ to ‘outside’ using the 'mediating' principle of Lafontaine.

It seems to me that the Prairie Struggle Organization 'blew it' by underestimating the value of their anarchist campfire gatherings.
i sense that you may be a prisoner in a fire-ant hill whose inhabitants have been passing on the message from generation to generation that there is a chamber within the hill that is the fountainhead of supreme power, and that if we all dream together (for the dream we dream together is reality), it can happen that one of us will be able to go there and draw the magic sword excalibur from the rock, ... ooops, .. wrong dream, ... one of us, if everyone keeps dreaming so as to sustain the reality, will be able to go there and and don the robes of office and raise the golden sceptre of sovereigntist power, ...and behold, .... if that chosen one be you, the supreme power will flow through you like lightning flows through a tree and you will command the behaviours of the entire populace. when you, the annointed one, speak, all will listen and obey ('plan 2' is that if any of the little rascals out there ignore you, a flying squad will be sent forth to beat the little buggers about the head until they see sufficient stars to encourage their re-entry into the dream state)
the view of the anthill is commonly by way of analytical inquiry, like the view of the university in Russell Ackoff's 'systems sciences' view which acknowledges that every system is included in a relational suprasystem. therefore, analytical inquiry must be grounded in synthetical inquiry. in the case of the university, before we objectize it using intellectual subject-verb-predicate constructs wherein in we RE-present it, intellectually, as an 'independent system with internal components and processes driven and directed development and behaviour', ... we can acknowledge that, in the physical reality of our natural experience, a need develops within the relational suprasystem of community that keeps pulling the flow of product through the university. this is the larger view; i.e. that the university is an 'organ' serving the relational suprasystem it is included in; i.e. it is NOT an independent material object machine thing with its own internal process driven and directed behaviour, ... that is just the intellectual impression we give to ourselves when we split the dynamic 'figure' out of the dynamic 'ground' by superimposing the 'dynamic figure' against an absolute space and absolute time reference frame giving it the APPEARANCE of an independent object-machine thing.

if we want to acknowledge what is evident in the physical reality of our natural experience, that the relational suprasystem dynamic is the more comprehensive way of understanding the dynamic, then, in Ackoff's terms, we have to "ground the analytical inquiry in synthetical inquiry". this means that we must suspend our synthetic intellectual separating of 'dynamic figure' and 'dynamic ground', or in other words, acknowledge the relational nature of space. non-euclidian relational space is to our commonly employed (in intellectual RE-presentation), euclidian space, as Poincare puts it, like the relation between a polynomial of degree two (relational space) and a polynomial of degree one (three linear dimensional space aka 'rectangular space aka 'euclidian space').

it is harder to articulate relational dynamics; i.e. dynamics as we understand them in modern physics wherein 'relations' are in precedence over 'objects'.

"“Space is another framework we impose upon the world” . . . ” . . . here the mind may affirm because it lays down its own laws; but let us clearly understand that while these laws are imposed on our science, which otherwise could not exist, they are not imposed on Nature.” . . . “Euclidian geometry is . . . the simplest, . . . just as the polynomial of the first degree is simpler than a polynomial of the second degree.” . . . “the space revealed to us by our senses is absolutely different from the space of geometry.” . . . “Finally, our Euclidean geometry is itself only a sort of convention of language; mechanical facts might be enunciated with reference to a [relational] non-Euclidean space which would be a guide less convenient than, but just as legitimate as, our ordinary space ; the enunciation would thus become much more complicated, but it would remain possible. Thus absolute space, absolute time, geometry itself, are not conditions which impose themselves on mechanics ; all these things are no more antecedent to mechanics than the French language is logically antecedent to the verities one expresses in French.” – Henri Poincare, Science and Hypothesis

since our language naturally lends itself to object-based RE-presentations; i.e. subject-verb-predicate constructs which support predicative rather than impredicative (circular) logic, we are constantly 'talking ourselves into falsely believing in the 'reality' of figure-divided-from-relational-ground conceptions.

in fact, our experience is constantly arguing with our simplistic noun-verb-predicate intellectual constructions, and informing us that 'relations' are more fundamental than 'objects';

“[In nature]… “the individual parts reciprocally determine one another.” … “The properties of one mass always include relations to other masses,” … “Every single body of the Universe stands in some definite relations with every other body in the Universe.” Therefore, no object can “be regarded as wholly isolated.” And even in the simplest case, “the neglecting of the rest of the world is impossible.” – Ernst Mach

we don't have to constrain ourselves to a euclidian object-based worldview, and by such constraining, imprison ourselves in that kind of world, ... that's the kind of thing that Authorianism and Capitalism does. there's more to life's experience than making us prisoners of our own rational intellect (making ourselves out to be machines working within a world of machinery), ... there's 'field' aka 'spirit' which is accessible to our experience-based intuition, though not by mechanistic (euclidian) science and rationality. material objects are merely the visible and tangible aspect of the relational world we live in. As Schroedinger says, objects are schaumkommen (appearances), variations in the relational structure of space. and as Faraday said;
